---
title: FediTest 0.3 release
date: 2024-07-15
---

FediTest 0.3 has been released. This release is mainly a maturity improvement over
our first {{% pageref "0.2" %}}.

## To upgrade:

If you have installed FediTest via pip, upgrade with:

```
% pip install --upgrade feditest
```

Once you've upgraded successfully, you can now check your currently installed version with:

```
% feditest version
```

## Main changes

* Each test result has an HTML anchor that is highlighted when the HTML report is accessed
  at a URL with added `#anchor`. This makes it easy to send e-mail to a collaborator
  pointing to a particular test result in a larger test report.

* HTML reports are more readable in dark mode.

* HTML is not garbled when accessed on a small screen e.g. mobile phone. We are not
  trying to squeeze lots of results onto a small screen, however, so it just basically
  tells you to find a larger screen.

* HTML reports show percentages in addition to pass/fail numbers.

* JSON testplans and test result files now contain the FediTest version and emit a
  warning if the version of the file and the installed FediTest version are not the
  same.

* `data:` URIs are now accepted as valid URIs in WebFinger files.

Here's the full list of
[closed issues in Feditest](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/milestone/4?closed=1)
and of
[closed issues in the Fediverse tests](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest-tests-fediverse/milestone/4?closed=1).

## Thank you

* A number of implementors have been fixing issues we have reported. Thank you, the less
  bugs there are for interop, the better the Fediverse works, so this is great!
  (We are not acknowledging specific projects here because we don't have a good overview
  who has been working on it and who hasn't.)

* We have received various kinds of help from several people. They are now listed as
  contributors on {{% pageref "/about.md" %}}. Check them out!

## Help wanted!

Have relationships with a Fediverse project? Point them to FediTest, and the
{{% pageref "/contrib/results/" %}}, in the hope those results will be useful to them to
improve their software. And check off their name
[here](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest.org/issues/15).

