---
title: FediTest 0.4 release
date: 2024-09-23
---

FediTest 0.4 has been released. This release is a major improvement over the previous
{{% pageref "0.3" %}}. Far more things are working, but we also still have a while to
go.

## To upgrade:

If you have installed FediTest via pip, upgrade with:

```
% pip install --upgrade feditest
```

Once you've upgraded successfully, you can now check your currently installed version with:

```
% feditest version
```

It should report 0.4.

## Major new features

* FediTest now knows how to speak to the Mastodon API. This means we can now run
  automate both the control and observation of Mastodon {{% gls node %}} in tests
  without needing human intervention.

* Nodes running WordPress (plus the needed plugins:
  [ActivityPub](https://wordpress.org/plugins/activitypub/) and
  [Enable Mastodon Apps](https://wordpress.org/plugins/enable-mastodon-apps/)) can also
  be automated in the same fashion.

* We have an initial set of {{% gl system-level "system-level" %}} Fediverse tests. These
  system-level tests test functionality such as follow, reply, like, announce and delete.
  These system-level tests can be run in a fully automated fashion for {{% gls constellation %}}
  whose {{% gls node %}} run either Mastodon or WordPress + plugins, using
  {{% gl ubosgears %}} and
  {{% gls constellation %}} such as:

  * Mastodon against Mastodon (e.g. follow and message delivery from one Mastodon instance
    to another)
  * WordPress + plugins against Mastodon
  * Mastodon against WordPress + plugins
  * Mastodon against Mastodon against Mastodon (e.g. if a post is created on instance A,
    and boosted from instance B to an account on C, and then deleted, will it also be
    deleted on instance C?)

* Locally-running {{% gls node %}} (i.e. {{% gls Node %}} running in a Linux container or
  virtual machine) can now communicate with each other over HTTPS at
  fully-qualified DNS hostnames. This has become possible by running local DNS, and
  a local certificate authority. To support this with non-public IP addresses in a
  Linux container, the built-in SSRF protections of WordPress and Mastodon are automatically
  disabled.

* As you probably guessed from the bullets above, our focus in the release has been to fully
  integrate Mastodon with FediTest, as well as WordPress + plugins. This is a good
  foundation on top of which other {{% gls app %}} can be integrated going forward.

* HTML report generation has been improved: only generate the test matrix if the same tests
  have been run with multiple {{% gls constellation %}}. As a consequence, the
  {{% gls TestPlan %}} are now comprised of one session template and one or more
  {{% gls constellation %}}.

* See some tentative results, check out the current
  {{% pageref "/contrib/results/" "test reports" %}}.

## Other changes and improvements

* Instead of having to generate the various {{% pageref "/reference/json-files.md" %}} one
  step at a time, you can now specify the tests and the {{% gls node %}} of the
  {{% gl constellation %}} right on the `feditest run` command-line. Other subcommands
  have been similarly made more flexible.

* The FediTest framework now distinguished between normal {{% gls node %}}
  (running {{% gls app %}} such as Mastodon) and {{% gls diagnostic-node %}} which have
  extra responsibilities and  extra abilities to be controlled by tests scripts and report
  observations. (This is mostly a placeholder for the future, we don't have code yet
  that uses this beyond the {{% gl Imp %}}.)

* A new scheme for listing already-existing accounts on SaaS-hosted {{% gls node %}} in
  the {{% gl node %}} definition JSON. This makes it significantly easier to understand
  and run how to use FediTest with already-running instances.

* We have an initial set of unit tests for FediTest itself. (How do you test a test
  framework? Maybe it's test frameworks all the way down!) We use `pyunit` for unit
  tests and `feditest` itself for smoke tests.

* The documentation here at [feditest.org](https://feditest.org) has been expanded.

* Lots and lots of other bug fixes and improvements. In doubt, check the
  [commit](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/commits/develop/)
  [logs](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest-tests-fediverse/commits/develop/).

## Incompatibilities

Some of the {{% pageref "/reference/json-files.md" "JSON files used by FediTest" %}} have
changed their syntax somewhat. In particular, there is a brand-new way of specifying
existing and non-existing accounts in {{% gl node %}} definitions, and because the
structure of {{% gls TestPlan %}} has changed a bit, {{% gl TestPlan %}} JSON files
need to be re-generated.


## Known issues

* We are still at 0.x version, so we're not done yet!

* ActivityPub messages POSTed by WordPress (plus plugins) do not always arrive in time.
  That's because of [#397](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/issues/397) for
  which we need guidance from the WordPress / ActivityPub plugin project.

* Also check the [issue](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/issues)
  [trackers](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest-tests-fediverse/issues).

## Help wanted!

Are you part of a Fediverse software project? Please point them to FediTest, and the
{{% pageref "/contrib/results/" %}}, in the hope those results will be useful to them to
improve their software. And check off their name
[here](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest.org/issues/15).
