---
title: FediTest 0.5 release
date: 2024-12-19
---

FediTest 0.5 has been released. This is primarily a bug fix release. It also incorporates
feedback from users, and feedback from an accessibility review and a security review.

## To upgrade:

If you have installed FediTest via pip, upgrade with:

```
% pip install --upgrade feditest
```

Once you've upgraded successfully, you can now check your currently installed version with:

```
% feditest version
```

It should report 0.5.

## Major changes

* A security review was completed, and the results were incorporated. No major issues
  were found. (Related issues at tagged "security" in the
  [bug tracker](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/milestone/7?closed=1)).

* An accessibility review was completed, and most of the results were incorporated.
  (Related issues tagged "accessibility" in the
  [bug tracker](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/milestone/7?closed=1)).
  There's one [open issue](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/issues/435)
  we could use help with from a CSS wizard.

* HTML report generation was improved in various ways. For example, the reports now
  emit the name of the tested application even if that name was not known at the
  beginning of the test run.

* Better command-line prompts when tests are run interactively without a fully
  automated {{% gl NodeDriver %}}.

* There are more unit tests for FediTest itself.

* Better error messages for a variety of conditions.

* Test results on this website have been updated.

* Documentation on this website has been improved. This includes more details on how
  to extend FediTest. There is now also {{% pageref "/quickstart/sandbox/" %}} which
  should help simplify the explanation for how FediTest works and how developers
  can adapt it to their own needs.

List of [all closed issues](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/milestone/7?closed=1).

## Known issues

* The HTML report shows test names with `<wbr>` in the name due to an HTML escaping issue
  introduced when setting autoescaping to `true` in in the Jinja2 template processor, which
  we did for security reasons. This produces a very wide first column.
  ([#442](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/issues/442), fixed on `develop`.)

* Specifying pre-existing and non-existing accounts in {{% gl node_json %}} files requires
  a `role` parameter although it should not.
  ([#441](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/issues/441), fixed on `develop`.)
