---
title: FediTest implementation update
date: 2024-04-30
author: Johannes Ernst
authorurl: https://j12t.org/
---

We are making progress! Here is where we are:

* The [FediTest framework](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest/) now has the
  right structure. (I think ...) Here are the core abstractions:

  * `TestPlan`, consisting of one or more `TestPlanSessions`, each of which is
    a sequence of tests that are run against a `Constellation` of `Node`s.
    `TestPlans` can be generated automatically and edited manually for maximum
    flexibility.

  * A `Constellation` of `Node`s is essentially a simulated, small Fediverse consisting
    of two or more `Node`s running software and attempting to communicate with each
    other. For each test session, a `Constellation` is set up, the tests are run,
    and the `Constellation` is taken back down.

  * A `Node`, you guessed it, is a website that runs a particular Fediverse application.
    The Fediverse application running at a `Node` can be unmodified as it would be
    deployed into production, or instrumented with extra APIs for better test automation.

  * The `Node` is managed (application, DNS etc provisioned, unprovisioned etc) by a
    `NodeDriver`, whose responsibility it is to know how to do this.
    We have a few `NodeDriver`s so far,
    including the `ManualNodeDriver` (the user has to do everything based on prompts),
    the `SaasNodeDriver` (degenerate version for software that only exists as SaaS)
    and the `UbosNodeDriver`, which uses [UBOS Gears](https://ubos.net/) for
    management, as it knows how to do install and restore complex server-side applications
    and we can reuse this. (Note: UBOS is one of "my" projects.)

  * Subtypes of `Node` let us instrument the running `Node`s, by making them "do things"
    ("now post a note!") and report on what happened ("has the private message arrived?").
    We do not have implementations of this functionality yet, except for for certain
    limited fallbacks. (See next steps below.)

  * `TestRun`, which is the instance of a `TestPlan`, and which produces results
    either in an ad-hoc format or in the [TAP format](https://node-tap.org/tap-format/).

  * `Test`s can come in two flavors: (1) single functions marked as `@test` run from the
    beginning to the end and may succeed or fail; (2) classes marked as `@test` run
    several member functions annotated with `@step` in sequence while maintaining
    state between the steps. The second one is much more manageable for the complex
    setups many of the more interesting tests require.

  I believe the FediTest framework now meets all the requirements for being handle the
  types of tests we want to run that will get us to good test coverage over time. (It was
  not easy! I will probably need to eat my words :-P )

* We have categorized tests into multiple categories for better management. See
  [separate directories](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest-tests-fediverse/tree/develop/tests)
  in the `tests` directory of the
  [FediTest-tests-Fediverse repo](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest-tests-fediverse).

  * Some of the categories match specific standards documents, such as ActivityPub and
    WebFinger etc. What to test based on the respective standard is annotated with
    [Annost](https://github.com/jernst/annost) and the annotations are found in the
    respective `TEST-SOURCES` subdirectory. To look at them, you need to (1) check out
    the repo, (2) run `git submodule init` (3) run `git submodule update` and
    (3) open the annotated HTML file in the browser.

  * In lieu of having official standards, we've done the same for non-standard SWICG
    documents, such as the recent "ActivityPub and HTTP Signatures" community report.

  * The `fediverse` directory tries to define how it is all put together into high-level
    tests that approximate what users might expect. Weirdly enough, there aren't
    any documents that describe what those expectations are known to be, or should be.
    So we collected user scenarios from the community.

* There are some actual tests in those directories, but not many yet. Now that we have
  the right framework in which to express them, and we have identified what the documents
  say should be tested, it should be relatively straightforward to write them down in
  Python.

  Some examples:

  * One test for a WebFinger server:
    [Do not accept malformed resource parameters](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest-tests-fediverse/blob/develop/tests/webfinger/server/4_2__4_do_not_accept_malformed_resource_parameters.py).
    Note the name of the test file is based on the section in the
    [Annost-annotated WebFinger RFC](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest-tests-fediverse/blob/develop/tests/webfinger/TEST-SOURCES/index-annost.html)
    where the test was found.

  * One test for a WebFinger client:
    [Accept unknown entries](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest-tests-fediverse/blob/develop/tests/webfinger/client/4_4__2_accept_unknown_entries.py).

  * One test for full-fledged Fediverse interactions:
    [Follow](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest-tests-fediverse/blob/develop/tests/fediverse/test_follow.py).

If you want to try and run some of this, go to {{% pageref "/docs/quickstart/" %}}.

## Next steps:

* Code more Fediverse tests similar to
  [Follow](https://github.com/fediverse-devnet/feditest-tests-fediverse/blob/develop/tests/fediverse/test_follow.py)
  using high-level APIs, such as the one we've started on `FediverseNode`. Example method:
  `make_a_follow_b`.

* As we code more high-level tests, expand the high-level APIs.

* Create a `MastodonClientNode` implementation that maps those APIs to the Mastodon
  client API, which has been implemented not just by Mastodon but by several other
  Fediverse applications. We expect that we will be able to automate many tests by
  mapping to this API.

* I'd really like to see a gRPC mapping, which we could use as a language-agnostic way
  of driving Fediverse applications that aren't written in Python and aren't using
  the Mastodon API.

* Start producing actual reports from actual testing.

This is all work in progress, of course, so YMMV! Issues? Questions? Chat with us
on Matrix on [#fediverse-testing:matrix.org](https://matrix.to/#/%23fediverse-testing:matrix.org).
